docs/AUDIO_TRANSCODING.md, before:

# Audio Transcoding — Guide

This guide describes how the Transcoder addon processes **standalone audio files** referenced by USDB Syncer SyncMeta (the audio resource for a song).

If you are looking for the full configuration reference (including defaults), see [`docs/CONFIGURATION.md`](CONFIGURATION.md).

## What “audio transcoding” means in this addon

The addon can:

- detect the current audio codec/container via `ffprobe`
- transcode audio to a configured target codec/container
- optionally apply audio normalization
- update SyncMeta and song headers (`#AUDIO:` and `#MP3:`) to prevent re-download loops

Important scope note

- This guide is about **standalone audio files** (SyncMeta audio).
- It does not “replace the audio track inside video files.” Video transcoding may copy or re-encode the video’s embedded audio stream as part of the video output.

## Supported audio output codecs

The addon supports these target codecs (configured via `audio.audio_codec`):

| Setting | Codec | Typical file extension | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|
| `aac` | AAC (FFmpeg `aac`) | `.m4a` | Good default for broad compatibility |
| `mp3` | MP3 (FFmpeg `libmp3lame`) | `.mp3` | Widest compatibility; can be larger at equal quality |
| `vorbis` | Ogg Vorbis (FFmpeg `libvorbis`) | `.ogg` | Open format; player support varies |
| `opus` | Opus (FFmpeg `libopus`) | `.opus` | Very efficient; requires newer decoders in some environments |

Encoder availability

- These outputs depend on your FFmpeg build.
- If you get errors like “Unknown encoder 'libmp3lame'”, see [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md).

## Codec selection recommendations

Use these practical defaults:

- **Choose `aac`** if you want a simple default with good compatibility.
- **Choose `mp3`** if you prioritize maximum playback compatibility.
- **Choose `opus`** if you want great quality at smaller sizes and your playback environment is modern.
- **Choose `vorbis`** if you want an open codec and your player supports it.

Lossy-to-lossy warning

If your inputs are already lossy (AAC/MP3/Vorbis/Opus), transcoding them again can reduce quality. The addon tries to stream-copy when possible, but normalization or force flags will re-encode.

## Quality settings (by codec)

Only the setting for your selected codec is used.

### MP3 (`mp3_quality`)

- Range: `0` to `9` (lower is better quality)
- Uses LAME VBR quality (`-q:a`)

Recommended

- `0–2`: transparent/very high quality
- `3–5`: smaller files

### Vorbis (`vorbis_quality`)

- Range: `-1.0` to `10.0` (higher is better quality)

Recommended

- `8.0–10.0`: very high quality
- `5.0–7.0`: smaller files

### AAC (`aac_vbr_mode`)

- Range: `1` to `5` (higher is better quality)

Recommended

- `5`: highest quality
- `3`: balanced

### Opus (`opus_bitrate_kbps`)

- Range: `6` to `510`
- Target bitrate in kbps

Recommended

- `96–128`: good quality for most music
- `160`: very high quality for music

## Normalization guide

Normalization aims to make tracks play at a consistent perceived loudness.

### Key terms (user-friendly)

- **LUFS**: “how loud it sounds” (more negative means quieter)
- **EBU R128**: a standard way to measure/normalize loudness
- **True Peak (dBTP)**: helps avoid clipping after normalization

### Methods

Configure these in `audio.audio_normalization_*`.

#### 1) EBU R128 loudnorm (`audio_normalization_method: "loudnorm"`)

How it works

- Pass 1 measures loudness for the file.
- Pass 2 applies normalization using those measurements.

Why you’d use it

- You want consistent loudness across different players (it rewrites the audio).

Recommended starting point

- `audio_normalization_target`: `-18.0` LUFS
- `audio_normalization_true_peak`: `-2.0` dBTP
- `audio_normalization_lra`: `11.0` LU

#### 2) ReplayGain tagging (`audio_normalization_method: "replaygain"`)

How it works

- Writes ReplayGain tags into the output when the container/player supports it.

Why you’d use it

- You prefer tag-based adjustment (player-controlled) rather than rewriting samples.

Important limitation

- Support depends on your player and output format.

## Example configurations

### Example: MP3 for maximum compatibility

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "mp3",
    "mp3_quality": 2,
    "audio_normalization_enabled": false
  }
}
```

### Example: Opus + loudnorm normalization (consistent loudness)

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "opus",
    "opus_bitrate_kbps": 160,
    "audio_normalization_enabled": true,
    "audio_normalization_method": "loudnorm",
    "audio_normalization_target": -18.0,
    "audio_normalization_true_peak": -2.0,
    "audio_normalization_lra": 11.0
  }
}
```

### Example: Force re-encode even if already correct

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "aac",
    "force_transcode_audio": true
  }
}
```

## Troubleshooting quick links

- Encoder missing (`libmp3lame`, `libvorbis`, `libopus`): [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md)
- Loudnorm failures / invalid measurements: [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md)

Commit message:

feat(audio): implement smart normalization skipping with verification infrastructure
Add intelligent skipping of audio transcoding when normalization is already applied:

- R128 (loudnorm): Skip transcoding when file format matches target, assuming normalization is already applied
- ReplayGain: Check for existing ReplayGain tags; skip transcoding if present
- Force transcode option overrides smart skipping behavior

Add verification infrastructure for future batch wizard:
- SQLite-based loudness analysis cache (loudness_cache.py)
- Verification logic and tolerance evaluation (loudness_verifier.py)
- ReplayGain tag detection for Ogg and other containers

Update process_audio() to check normalization requirements separately from codec/container mismatches, enabling selective transcode only when normalization is actually needed.

Improve settings dialog resize logic to prevent scrollbars when toggling conditional fields.

Update documentation and tooltips to explain smart skipping behavior and force transcode override.

docs/AUDIO_TRANSCODING.md, after:

# Audio Transcoding — Guide

This guide describes how the Transcoder addon processes **standalone audio files** referenced by USDB Syncer SyncMeta (the audio resource for a song).

If you are looking for the full configuration reference (including defaults), see [`docs/CONFIGURATION.md`](CONFIGURATION.md).

## What “audio transcoding” means in this addon

The addon can:

- detect the current audio codec/container via `ffprobe`
- transcode audio to a configured target codec/container
- optionally apply audio normalization
- update SyncMeta and song headers (`#AUDIO:` and `#MP3:`) to prevent re-download loops

Important scope note

- This guide is about **standalone audio files** (SyncMeta audio).
- It does not “replace the audio track inside video files.” Video transcoding may copy or re-encode the video’s embedded audio stream as part of the video output.

## Supported audio output codecs

The addon supports these target codecs (configured via `audio.audio_codec`):

| Setting | Codec | Typical file extension | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|
| `aac` | AAC (FFmpeg `aac`) | `.m4a` | Good default for broad compatibility |
| `mp3` | MP3 (FFmpeg `libmp3lame`) | `.mp3` | Widest compatibility; can be larger at equal quality |
| `vorbis` | Ogg Vorbis (FFmpeg `libvorbis`) | `.ogg` | Open format; player support varies |
| `opus` | Opus (FFmpeg `libopus`) | `.opus` | Very efficient; requires newer decoders in some environments |

Encoder availability

- These outputs depend on your FFmpeg build.
- If you get errors like “Unknown encoder 'libmp3lame'”, see [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md).

## Codec selection recommendations

Use these practical defaults:

- **Choose `aac`** if you want a simple default with good compatibility.
- **Choose `mp3`** if you prioritize maximum playback compatibility.
- **Choose `opus`** if you want great quality at smaller sizes and your playback environment is modern.
- **Choose `vorbis`** if you want an open codec and your player supports it.

Lossy-to-lossy warning

If your inputs are already lossy (AAC/MP3/Vorbis/Opus), transcoding them again can reduce quality. The addon tries to stream-copy when possible, but normalization or force flags will re-encode.

## Quality settings (by codec)

Only the setting for your selected codec is used.

### MP3 (`mp3_quality`)

- Range: `0` to `9` (lower is better quality)
- Uses LAME VBR quality (`-q:a`)

Recommended

- `0–2`: transparent/very high quality
- `3–5`: smaller files

### Vorbis (`vorbis_quality`)

- Range: `-1.0` to `10.0` (higher is better quality)

Recommended

- `8.0–10.0`: very high quality
- `5.0–7.0`: smaller files

### AAC (`aac_vbr_mode`)

- Range: `1` to `5` (higher is better quality)

Recommended

- `5`: highest quality
- `3`: balanced

### Opus (`opus_bitrate_kbps`)

- Range: `6` to `510`
- Target bitrate in kbps

Recommended

- `96–128`: good quality for most music
- `160`: very high quality for music

## Normalization guide

Normalization aims to make tracks play at a consistent perceived loudness.

### Key terms (user-friendly)

- **LUFS**: "how loud it sounds" (more negative means quieter)
- **EBU R128**: a standard way to measure/normalize loudness
- **True Peak (dBTP)**: helps avoid clipping after normalization

### Smart skipping behavior

The addon intelligently skips transcoding when normalization is already applied:

- **R128 (loudnorm)**: Files that match the target codec/container are assumed to be already normalized and transcoding is skipped.
- **ReplayGain**: Files that match the target codec/container are checked for existing ReplayGain tags. If tags are present, transcoding is skipped.

To force re-normalization of files that would otherwise be skipped, enable `force_transcode_audio` in settings.

### Methods

Configure these in `audio.audio_normalization_*`.

#### 1) EBU R128 loudnorm (`audio_normalization_method: "loudnorm"`)

How it works

- Pass 1 measures loudness for the file.
- Pass 2 applies normalization using those measurements.
- When format matches target: assumes file is already normalized, skips transcoding.

Why you'd use it

- You want consistent loudness across different players (it rewrites the audio).

Recommended starting point

- `audio_normalization_target`: `-18.0` LUFS
- `audio_normalization_true_peak`: `-2.0` dBTP
- `audio_normalization_lra`: `11.0` LU

#### 2) ReplayGain tagging (`audio_normalization_method: "replaygain"`)

How it works

- Writes ReplayGain tags into the output when the container/player supports it.
- When format matches target: checks for existing ReplayGain tags, skips transcoding if present.

Why you'd use it

- You prefer tag-based adjustment (player-controlled) rather than rewriting samples.

Important limitation

- Support depends on your player and output format.
- Tag detection checks standard ReplayGain fields (REPLAYGAIN_TRACK_GAIN, etc.) in format metadata or stream tags (for Ogg containers).

## Example configurations

### Example: MP3 for maximum compatibility

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "mp3",
    "mp3_quality": 2,
    "audio_normalization_enabled": false
  }
}
```

### Example: Opus + loudnorm normalization (consistent loudness)

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "opus",
    "opus_bitrate_kbps": 160,
    "audio_normalization_enabled": true,
    "audio_normalization_method": "loudnorm",
    "audio_normalization_target": -18.0,
    "audio_normalization_true_peak": -2.0,
    "audio_normalization_lra": 11.0
  }
}
```

### Example: Force re-encode even if already correct

```json
{
  "audio": {
    "audio_transcode_enabled": true,
    "audio_codec": "aac",
    "force_transcode_audio": true
  }
}
```

## Troubleshooting quick links

- Encoder missing (`libmp3lame`, `libvorbis`, `libopus`): [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md)
- Loudnorm failures / invalid measurements: [`docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md`](TROUBLESHOOTING.md)
